% Open Source Geospatial Visual Analytics and Decision Technologies
% Sergio Rey[^inst], Luc Anselin, Xun Li, Robert Pahle, Julia Koschinsky

[^inst]: All authors are affiliated with the GeoDa Center for Geospatial Analysis and Computation, School of
Geographical Sciences and Urban Planning, Arizona State University.
`[srey|Luc.Anselin|Xun.Li|Robert.Pahle|julia.koshinsky]@asu.edu`

**Abstract**:
Live data streams and dashboard systems to visualize patterns of these streams
are not only characterizing new technological infrastructures in smart cities
but are becoming more common in many urban areas (Batty et al. 2012). In this
context, an opportunity exists to supplement client-side closed-box desktop
solutions for spatial data analysis with more modular and expandable spatial
analytic software libraries. These can be flexibly integrated with live data
streams, visualization libraries and decision support tools to be part of
end-to-end solutions from data to analysis and visualization to generate
evidence-based insights in near real-time. Further, as more open government
data are released regularly in machine-readable formats there is a need for
open analytics, including spatial analytics, to make sense of patterns in these
increasingly larger datasets. The lack of license fees enables analysts in
public, non-profit and educational institutions who are already utilizing open
data to employ more powerful analytics. Finally, by making the implementation
of spatial methods transparent, open spatial tools are part of the larger
movement toward open science (Rey 2014).  In this paper we present one recently
example of such open spatial analytics, the free and open source Python-based
Spatial Analysis Library (PySAL) developed at the GeoDa Center for Geospatial
Analysis and Computation. Several examples of flexible delivery formats of
PySAL are discussed that include desktop programs (stand-alone and plug-in) and
web-based applications (web services, web-based spatial data management, and
the Complex Systems Framework (CSF) decision support system.
